Hey everyone, I'm Chris Crowe, campus pastor for Crossway Christian Church's Milford campus here in Southern New Hampshire where our mission is all about practicing the way of Jesus together as we pursue God, build community, and unleash compassion.
We pray that what you hear today will help you experience God more deeply and live more and more like Jesus.
We're in the third week of Advent together and today is the Joy Candle and we've already sang a couple of songs about joy.
We're gonna light a candle.
that's on joy.
But we have some scripture verses I like for us to read out loud together as a campus, and so you'll see those on the screen if you could bring those up.
First one's in Isaiah chapter 35 and verse 10.
Now this is the second advent or the coming of Christ.
Isaiah would prophesy that Jesus would come the first time, but then he goes way out into the future and prophesies for the second return of Christ.
So we are really in really two events in some way.
We're remembering Jesus coming the first time, but
We are literally waiting for his return a second time.
Here's that verse here.
Let's read together.
This began.
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with singing everlasting joy shall be upon their heads.
They shall obtain gladness and joy and sorrow and sighing shall flee.
Anybody a sire here?
You're like, I find myself sighing a lot.
And sometimes when you're under some pressure, some stress, things like that, then you sigh.
And our whole world is groaning, the Bible says.
But there's a day that's coming, and Jesus is coming back again.
And Isaiah was prophesying that.
Let's go to the New Testament now, and this is more for the first appearance of Jesus.
And so verse 10, let's start out loud.
Ready?
Let's begin.
And the angels said to them, fear not.
For behold, I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the people.
Amen?
Let's continue in our series.
I've asked Gabriel to come up.
Not the angel, Gary, but this is Gabriel.
Come on up here.
He's going to light the joy candle over here.
And then he said to me, do you mind if I read a scripture?
I said, what scripture are you talking about?
And so he's going to read a scripture too.
Go ahead, brother.
The pink one there.
And so he got baptized.
I don't know.
Must have been a month ago that he got baptized and
We were hanging out last night down at the Christmas party at the pond, and he was talking about ministry, pastoral ministry.
Come on down here, brother.
And so I just love this guy.
And so God's doing some great things in your life.
Thanks for liking it.
All right, read that scripture, brother.
All right.
You know, with the theme being joy, I think it's the scripture that I'm about to read is important for us to digest.
So just take a moment to really let the word sink into your heart and the Holy Spirit.
Let the Holy Spirit discern it, right?
In James chapter one verse two and three, it says, My brothers and sisters, whenever you face trials and tribulations of any kind, consider a pure joy.
For you know that the testing of your faith produces endurance and let endurance have its full effect on making you mature and complete.
When he asked to read that, the Holy Spirit was confirming that somebody in the house needed to hear that specific word.
And I said, you need to read that.
Can you read it one more time?
Go ahead.
My brothers and sisters, whenever you face trials and tribulations of an Incarn, consider it pure joy.
For you know that the testing of your faith produces endurance, and let endurance have its full effect on making you mature and complete.
It's James chapter one verse two and three.
Thanks brother.
Is that a word for anybody in the house today?
Yeah Let's continue our series rediscovering Christmas You'll see them on the screen.
I'm gonna fly through some of this and just do a quick review We've already looked at the waiting.
We looked at King a has a
And we saw that he was supposed to wait for the Lord and he didn't wait for the Lord and he made alliances with Assyria and some of the enemies of God.
And so he shouldn't have done that.
He should have just trusted the Lord.
And then the prophecy came that Jesus would be coming into the future and God himself would manifest.
He would have manifested the King Ahaz.
He would have, but he didn't because Ahaz turned away from the Lord.
We also looked at the anointing, and that was the first family, not the Trump family, by the way.
That's Joseph and Mary.
And so they were experiencing an anointing of God, not just them, but also Elizabeth.
And we looked at them.
Last Lord's Day.
Now let's talk about the welcoming.
The welcoming.
And I've titled this message, the innkeeper and the landlord, a radical welcome.
The innkeeper and the landlord, a radical welcome.
Welcome.
I remember growing up and hearing the Christmas story about the old grumpy innkeeper.
Did you ever hear that story?
And this innkeeper was portrayed in so many different ways as I was growing up, as that person who shut the door in the face of Joseph and Mary.
The no vacancy sign had gone up.
Now, if you've ever stayed at a bed and breakfast or lived in a rental property, you know that these experiences can go either really good or really badly.
I've gotten no vacancy signs many times and by God's grace have never ever had a slumlord.
Several years ago, I was in need of a ministry break and my mentor recommended an inn in Bar Harbor, Maine called the Primrose.
You'll see a picture of it on the screen.
And this Primrose inn was owned by Christians and what they would do is they had one guest room that was specifically for pastors to stay at for free.
And so we went up there for a week, and we stayed there for free, and we're blessed by their radical hospitality.
Very interesting, when they opened up that room for pastors, their business doubled, at least double if not tripled, as far as blessing on their life.
And so it was just an amazing, amazing experience for Elise and I. I've often wondered what Joseph and Mary must have felt as the innkeeper closed the door on their face.
For them, it must have been pretty traumatic.
I'm gonna look at some things with you this morning that I think maybe you haven't considered when it comes to this story in the scripture.
The beginning of Jesus' earthly life was filled with not only prophetic fulfillment, but surrounded by political corruption.
In addition to that, the principalities and powers and the rulers of the darkness of this age were at full force behind the scenes.
The end of Jesus' earthly life, we can also see the same thing as the landlord rents out an upper room or literally a guest room so Jesus can have his final meal with his apostles.
So we're going to look at the innkeeper in chapter two and then the landlord in chapter 22 and see how it all connects to you and I as Christians today.
Are you ready?
I think what we'll find out is that there's more to the story than we may have originally thought.
Take your Bible and go to Luke chapter two versus one to seven.
I'm going to read these out loud.
We won't read them together out loud.
I'll read them if you'll follow along.
Luke chapter two versus one down to verse seven.
In those days, a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be registered.
This was the first registration with Cornarius.
The governor was governor of Syria and all went to be registered each to his own town.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the town of Nazareth to Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David, to be registered with Mary, his betrothed, who was with child.
And while they were there, the time came for her to give birth.
And she gave birth to her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn.
Are you familiar with that story?
Raise your hand.
Very familiar with that story.
For years, I have read that story, preached out of that story, heard it as a child growing up in many, many forms of media.
And honestly, when you hear that story read as I just read it, maybe thoughts of snow falling or watching it's a wonderful life enter into your mind.
But behind the scenes of what we just read, we're gonna look at that it's very different than maybe you have given consideration all of these many years hearing this story.
And so I want to kind of go behind the scenes.
I want you to look at the first part of verse one.
It says, and it opens up in Luke the historian says, in those days, in those days, he's going to draw our attention to a specific period of time to give us context into what was happening in the world around the first family on the Christmas.
We need to remember that Israel was under Roman rule and oppression.
The Roman government was filled with corruption and control for power.
Sounds a little bit like today.
The Roman government was led by Caesar Augustus here in the context of the reading that we just read.
Now he's mentioned here, he is the nephew and adopted son of a more famous and familiar Julius Caesar.
And under chaos Octavius, his name or title was given to him Exalted One.
You can tell where all of this is gonna go.
So a decree and a word was given out by Caesar Augustus that a register
or census should go out into all the world.
And they thought in terms of the world as the Roman Empire.
They didn't think in terms of the globe like we would think of into all the world.
I mean the Milford Oval didn't even exist yet, right?
So this is the way they're thinking.
Into all the world this census would go, the Roman Empire.
Now why was this done?
It was all about count
and control over the people to exact heavy taxation and to recruit into the Roman military.
But I think it's more than that.
I think demonically what we're going to see here is that there would be a force against Christ being born that would seek to destroy him.
We know this in Matthew chapter 2 and verse 13, you'll see it on the screen.
Here's what it says, and this is referring to Herod, if you could bring that up.
2.13 of Matthew.
That's Quinerius, we'll skip by him.
Matthew 2.13, now, when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said, rise, take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt and remain there until I tell you for her is about to search for the child to destroy him.
So we read this story.
The story is nice.
We think of plays and Christmas specials and movies and things like that.
But behind the scenes, there's this demonic conspiracy to try to get rid of Christ.
I want to go a little bit further with you.
In verse two, you'll notice it says this.
This was the first registration when Cranarius was governor of Syria.
His full name is Publius Sulpisius Cranarius.
And I'm thinking, dad and mom couldn't have given you a name like John or Steve.
Really?
I'm not going to say that full name again.
But that's his full name.
And so he was governor of Syria.
Now, although it's not mentioned here, was also governor of Phoenicia.
There's a picture of what is known as the Tivoli Stone.
You'll see that on the screen.
The Tivoli Stone, and the Tivoli Stone mentions that Poobs was governor of Phoenicia.
Now, why do I bring this up?
What are the gods that the Syrians and the Phoenicians believed in?
Does anybody know?
Bail worship.
It was all bail worship.
Now you remember in Luke chapter 11 verse 14, maybe you don't, I'm just gonna fly over there real quick.
It says this, now as he was casting out a demon, this is Jesus, when the demon had gone out the mute man spoke and the people marveled, but some of them said he casts out demons by Beelzebub.
Originally that's Beelzebub, the prince of demons.
So here we have poobs,
Caesar Augustus is governor over these two nations.
Now what they believed in as Romans is they believed in a syncretistic form of religion.
So they would take the Canaanite gods and they would merge them with the Roman gods.
So you have Baal and the Canaanite gods, and then you have Zeus and the Greek gods, the equivalent.
So behind the scenes of all of this is the Prince of Demons, Beelzebub,
or the gods of Baal that are gonna come after Christ to try to destroy him.
It's a demonic attack of huge proportions.
Now the reason why I bring all of this up, it makes for a very intense and pressure filled environment where we find Joseph and Mary coming in looking for shelter.
That is not how I looked at this story all of these years.
But now I do.
So the question would be, here's the question.
Now, was it really an in?
Probably not.
The phrase in the in literally means a guest room.
And what we're looking at here is probably someone that Joseph and Mary knew fairly well.
And they went to their house and asked if there was room for them to stay.
And there was no room.
It was occupied.
So there's an image on the screen that I pulled up.
It's a New Testament house.
And this will kind of give you an idea of what it might have looked like back in that day.
You'll see that the animals actually were in a compartment or a room in the back of the house.
And sometimes even though it was so cold that the animals would help with keeping warm and all of that kind of thing.
And so there was a guest room.
Now it's not really shown there.
Sometimes the guest room would be on the roof.
Here is a room in the back of that house there.
But in addition to that, a lot of these houses would have an extra guest room.
But there's no guest room available to Joseph and Mary.
And so here's where I look at this text.
And I wonder if this first point would apply to the owners of that home.
Number one.
Our commitment, I'm going to change this around because I really believe I need to switch this a little bit.
The last minute this morning I'm looking at this outline, I'm like I need to add something here.
Our commitment to personal comfort and cost must grow into a greater conviction of the person of Christ.
Now this is where I'm getting this, because you have an owner here, or maybe a couple, we're not sure, and the house is open to them, but then
There's no room in the guest room, but they're going to put Jesus and the family in the shed or the back storage room or the animal room as they called it.
Now that's telling me something about these people.
That they understood the controversy surrounding Jesus.
They understood that he was betrothed.
Mary and Joseph, they were betrothed.
But it says that they were with child.
That makes it a whole different scenario.
That makes it a very, very interesting dynamic.
here so that these people are going to have to look at their own comfort zone and count the cost to bring this young family into their home.
It also says to me that they probably were a little bit limited on their understanding on who it was that was going to be born in the home.
AJ Sherrill said this, and this is a book that we're facing in this series on rediscovering Christmas, quote, radical welcome often
comes at a price.
Jesus welcomed sinners and was criticized.
He healed on the Sabbath and was threatened.
He ate in the homes of sinners and was slandered.
Jesus sat with an adulterous woman near a well in Samaria and was accosted by his closest friends.
So yes, radical welcome is costly.
This is even true today, but it's the way of the kingdom."
I believe what he said there.
Luke chapter 14, if you'll just take your eyes over there just quickly, Jesus mentions this cost or counting the cost.
Chapter 14, verse 28, for which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, whether he has enough to complete it.
Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation, is not able to finish, all who see it begin to mock him, saying, this man began to build and was not able to finish, or what king going out to encounter another king in war will not sit down first and deliberate
deliberate whether he is able with 10,000 to meet him who comes against him with 20,000.
And if not while the other is yet a great way off, he sends a delegation as per terms of peace.
So therefore, any one of you who does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple.
Think about this owner again.
Now they're confronted.
Okay, Joseph and Mary, you can come in.
I'm gonna put you over here in the animal section of my home.
He easily could have went
Okay, can you guys do my moving out of the guest room because we have someone here that's going to occupy who is the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords?
We don't see that.
We're going to all have to get to that place of counting the cost of our comfort zone.
What's it going to cost you?
We'll talk a little bit more in application time in a moment.
It all happens to each of us in our growth.
Jesus is desiring to take up residence in our lives to a greater degree.
I can only imagine that this couple was thinking, I don't know.
If I ask you to come in, if I have you in, this could be a reaction against the synagogue persecution, the Jewish community.
I don't know.
But they do it anyway.
And that's good that they did that.
But I wonder if they could have gone further than that.
And I think God calls all of us to go further.
He's gonna speak to you and He's gonna speak to me this.
When Jesus comes to take up residence in our life, when He comes into our home, comes into my heart, He's gonna confront some things.
The same thing happened when you were born again, when you were redeemed, when you became a Christian.
He's not asking you if you're gonna give just a little bit of your life.
He's gonna ask you, are you gonna give every part of your life?
This is the gospel.
This is what preachers need to preach.
You need to preach repentance unto life.
You need to preach discipleship.
You need to preach follow me and I will make you fishers of men.
And so we're not going to downplay this gospel message.
This is Jesus wanting to come into your life and change it all around.
He is the Lord.
He is Adonai.
He is L.L.
Young.
the God who is most high.
And it happened at your conversion.
Now, if you think that you became a Christian and he became your savior only, but not your Lord, and you wanna take Jesus and separate savior and Lord, then I'm gonna have a little bit of a problem with that theology only because the Bible says that.
You can't separate the savior and the Lord.
And so a lot of people, a lot of Christians today, they'll fall into this trap and say, well, I prayed a prayer
And Jesus is my savior, but I don't want to follow him as my Lord.
That's impossible.
And so if you made a decision for Jesus years ago, then there was nothing going on for 10, 15, 20 years.
And then all of a sudden you come around again and you're like, well, I just really feel like the Lord's working in my heart and he wants to do something.
And I just have this love and affection for him like I've never had before.
And I'm going to say to you, it probably weren't converted way back then.
That's what happened.
You heard the gospel, but it wasn't a genuine conversion.
I mean, you might have took him as savior, but you said, no, I don't want to follow him.
That's not genuine conversion.
But even Jesus now is going to say to us, what is your comfort zone?
How comfortable are you?
We live in a very comfortable land.
It's not a bad thing for your comfort zone to be challenged and for the cost.
the commitment to the cost to be challenged.
I hope that this man or this woman, this couple that had this house with the guest room got to a place of greater conviction about who Jesus is.
I think that they did.
I really do.
Can't quite prove it.
I can't quite prove it, but I just would imagine that when Jesus was born, they knew about it.
They were probably there, right?
Saw it happen.
I just believe that they were touched.
Let's go to Luke chapter 22, and I'll look at a landlord with you.
Luke 22, now this is the end of Jesus' life, obviously, and there's another guest room that someone opens up to them.
Radical hospitality, a radical welcoming, that's the subtitle.
A radical welcome.
Luke 22, 7 to 13.
Let me read this out now if you'll follow with me.
Then they came down the day of unleavened bread on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
And so Jesus sent Peter and John saying, go and prepare a Passover for us that we may eat it.
And they said to him, where will you have us prepare it?
And he said to them, behold, when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you.
I've always thought that was odd, right?
Follow him into the house that he enters and tell the master of the house, the teacher says to you,
Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?
And he will show you a large upper room furnished, prepare it there.
And they went and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
There's a landlord here I want to look at.
So now we're in Jerusalem, obviously it's the final week of Jesus' life on earth and literally the day before he would be crucified.
Again, there's a lot going on behind the scenes in the supernatural, of course there is a
the political shenanigans going on, that's the plotting of the religious people against Jesus.
We know that.
This is what religious people do.
They love to plot, and so they were doing that against Christ.
But there's these principalities and powers that are in full measure to once again destroy Jesus and put a stop to the kingdom of God being established.
Back in verse three, you'll notice it says, then Satan entered into Judas, called a scariat, who is the number of the twelve.
Interesting.
Satan and his hosts are busy once again.
Now watch this.
Anytime Jesus is taking up residency in people's lives and homes, the enemy will counter attack.
You will see this when you welcome more of Jesus.
If you say, Jesus, I want more of you in my life.
Jesus, I want you to rule and reign in my home.
Jesus, I want you to invade my son's heart, my daughter's heart, my child's life.
Jesus, I want you to do this.
All of a sudden you're going to have a counter attack from the forces of hell against you.
I'm just telling you the truth.
I said this to the four who got baptized.
I said it to the two women who originally we baptized here about five, six months ago.
I said, when you ask Jesus to come into your life to have more room, more authority, when you want to bow to him and he is the Lord of your life, then you're going to have a counter attack against you every single time in 30 some years of ministry.
They say the same thing because that's what the devil does.
And I'm gonna say to you that if you're gonna say to Jesus today, and this is point number two, can I bring that up on the screen?
Point number two, offer the space in our lives that Jesus is asking for.
The landlord was asked, do you have space?
He was confronted.
He said, yes, here's an upper room.
I wanted to go to Jesus.
Does he know Jesus as Savior and Lord?
I don't know.
I would lean probably not, probably in process like a lot of us are, but not quite converted.
But what I like about this landlord is he opens up this space for Jesus and his apostles to celebrate the Passover.
In other words, he must have known something about the Word of God.
He knew Passover was being celebrated.
A couple of million people converge, and that's a lot of people back in that day.
They're coming from all over.
He knows about that.
He knows the Old Testament about Passover and the celebration of Passover.
But did he know Christ?
Hard to know.
Here, let me ask you some questions.
Don't rent it out to anyone else.
Jesus is asking for more space in your life.
It's a radical welcome.
It's like, Jesus, okay, okay, you're asking for this part of my life?
So here's the question I'm going to ask you.
What space in your heart and life have you reserved for yourself when all along Jesus is asking for it?
That's between you and the Lord.
I don't want you to say it out loud.
You wouldn't do it anyway in the public setting, probably.
But I want you to think about that.
We have a tendency to compartmentalize our lives.
Not long ago, this might be a little bit radical.
I don't know if I should even share it.
But I got a vision.
And the vision was my hands were on fire.
It was strange.
I was like, I've never had that happen before.
I had one of the staff members come up to me and he says, I read something recently in the book.
I want to read it to you.
And it was about somebody's hands on fire.
And the interpretation was radical surrender.
And then I said to the Lord, Lord, is there parts of my life that you are asking to have more space in to take residence up inside of me that I have not surrendered fully?
It was powerful.
How about your life?
Is there that place?
Jesus, you can have all of this, but not over here.
I love what the landlord does here.
It's a wonderful thing.
One, watch Jesus grow up.
for the owners of this inn, if you want to use that word.
They watched Jesus grow up and fulfill prophetic scripture.
The other, the landlord watched Jesus die and so fulfill scripture, prophetic scripture.
I think they were both impacted tremendously as a result of this.
How radical are we at inviting others into our space who need Jesus?
Jesus did this a lot.
Who could we welcome into our lives where this would be fairly radical for us?
I have a couple of images.
One is a homeless guy.
And the next one is a young girl that is just hungry.
Just a couple of illustrations.
Where can we radically welcome others with hospitality that would take us to another place, maybe, in our Christian growth?
Kind of landlord of your life.
of your heart, are you?
I want to be a good landlord.
Lord, help me to have people come into my space, the space you have given me.
And may they feel loved and cared for.
May they meet Jesus.
Before church today, there was a guy that parked in the front of our house.
I live in an apartment townhouse situation.
And there's a handicap spot in front of our house.
I don't know who this guy was.
He parked his truck there and never does.
Came out this morning and we started getting into a conversation.
He's decked out from top to bottom, Patriots.
He's excited.
He's excited about today.
And I am too.
But I'm getting into a conversation and honestly, there was a part of me that was like, snow's coming down, I'm getting the snow off our car, I'm going to get going to church.
And then like the convicting work of the spirit is like, why don't you just keep it open up?
Open up some space right now for this guy.
You never know what God's going to do.
Right?
And so I slowed it down a little bit.
And I was like, got into a conversation with him, found out that he knows some of you.
Like sitting here.
I know who's in the room now.
And I said, hey, I go to church down here at Gurney's Automotive.
And he said he's part of ARC.
Which is...
So I said, do you know someone so?
Yeah, I know someone so.
Do you know someone so?
No, that wouldn't have happened.
Because God's up to something there, right?
But see, I pulled back initially and I'm like, I don't know if I want to do this.
Let's open our lives up a little bit more.
Radical welcoming of others that might stretch us a little bit, might cause us to go out of our comfort zone.
Count the cost.
Right?
Here's some application points, and I'll bring it to a close.
And you'll see these on the screen.
And these four are based on these two scripture sections that we looked at.
A, choose conviction over comfort.
I'm going to pray these out.
We don't have to close our eyes.
Let's just pray these out.
Lord, I pray in Jesus' name that you would take us beyond our comfort zone,
Helps to count the cost.
Take us to a greater depth of our love for you, Jesus.
A greater conviction.
We don't want to put you over there in the animal section of our house.
We want you to have the best room.
The best room.
Not the shed, not the garage.
Take the best place.
That's it.
Conviction.
Give the very best Jesus, Jesus, you deserve the best.
And maybe you would want to say, as I have said many times through the years, I've only given you half.
I've only given you three quarters.
I've given you some leftovers.
Jesus, you deserve the best.
Receive the best, Lord.
Make room where he's asking, oh, this place in our heart, this place in our family.
You deserve to be in that place too, Lord.
Every room, every place.
And then D, listen to what he says to you.
We want to be hearers of the word, not just, we want to be doers of the word, not just hearers of the word.
When you speak, Lord Jesus, we will do what you say to do.
Is that the prayer of your heart?
We thank you for your word, Lord.
We thank you.
Rediscovering Christmas is everything to do with the waiting, the anointing, and the welcoming.
I could put it like this.
His purpose is in the waiting.
His power in the pressure, His presence in the conflict.
So we looked at Ahaz, right?
The waiting.
We looked at Joseph and Mary.
That was the anointing.
And we looked at the innkeeper and the landlord, and that is the welcoming.
Hallelujah.
You are loved.
Thanks for listening to the Crossway Christian Church's Milford Campus Sermit Podcast.
If you'd like to plug into the life of our community or have any questions that we might be able to answer, visit our website at crosswaycc.org to connect with us.
Until next time, we can be with you.
May the Lord bless you and keep you.